[Issue #9880] Write docs about the backend portion of file virus scanning (#11208)
HHS/simpler-grants-gov: documentation/api/file-upload-and-scanning.md

  * The user can stream the current status of the scan back from the API which gets the result from DynamoDB
* If the file is successfully scanned, the file can now be converted into a specific domain file type (eg. application attachment, opportunity attachment)

Until that very last step, a file is not connected to any entity/resource in our system
except the user themselves. That last step is what makes it into a specific kind of file
in our system, and is the only portion that needs to differ between implementations on the backend.

The below diagram and sections go into this in much more technical detail.

## File Scan Status

We have the following file scan statuses that represent states of the file scan status:
* `pending` - The presigned URL for the file has been requested, but no file has been uploaded yet
* `in_progress` - File upload has happened, and file scanning is happening
* `complete` - A file has been successfully scanned, and is ready for domain specific logic
* `infected` - A file was rejected by our scanning process, and cannot be used by domain specific logic
* `processed` - A file has been converted to a domain specific file, and is no longer available

> ## Data Flow General

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## General Data Flow
```

This is the general flow of the file upload logic that all approaches share.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    participant Frontend
    participant FrontendService
    participant API
    participant DB
    participant S3
    participant ScanningLambda
    participant DynamoDB

    Note over FrontendService,S3: Get Presigned URL
    Frontend->>FrontendService: Asks to upload file of type<br>(File name + content type)

    activate FrontendService

    activate API
    FrontendService->>API: Ask for upload URL
    API->>S3: Ask for presigned URL

>     S3->>API: Presigned URL + Request Body

Reviewer: Don't we compute the URL/fields locally from IAM credentials as opposed to actually calling S3? We could write something like:

`API->>API: Generate presigned URL + request body (signed locally with IAM credentials)`

or however you want to structure it.

Author: That's technically correct that presigning a URL doesn't actually hit s3 but instead does some internal credential magic, but I think trying to call that out here would be more, not less confusing.

We still technically would need to reach out to AWS to get the initial credentials, so it's not all wrong.

a file to their specific domain context (eg. application attachment).

See [Domain File Endpoints](#domain-file-endpoints) for further detail.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    participant FrontendService
    participant API
    participant DB
    participant S3

    Note over FrontendService,S3: Domain Specific
    FrontendService ->> API: Pending File ID
    Note over API: Domain specific endpoint
    API->>DB: Fetch Pending File
    DB->>API: 
    API->>S3: Move file
    S3->>API: 
    API->>DB: Update domain specific file table
    DB->>API: 
    API->>FrontendService: Success/Error
```

## Getting a Presigned URL
We have an endpoint `POST /v1/files` which takes in a
file name and content type and returns a presigned URL
that the user can upload the file at.

A user is only able to request 100 presigned URLs per hour (configurable by env if needed).
We will return a 429 if they exceed this quota.

For this, we use AWS's [Boto3 library to generate a presigned POST url](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/boto3/latest/reference/services/s3/client/generate_presigned_post.html).
Importantly, we are not using presigned PUT, which while similar, doesn't

> allow you to specify conditions on the file being uploaded as well. The conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allow you to specify conditions on the file being uploaded. The conditions
```

that we include are:
* Content length, must be between 1b and 2gb
* Content type, must match what the user passed in
* File ID in the metadata must match the one we generate -> Note that this file ID in the metadata is used by the scanning logic to update the status later
* User ID in the metadata must match the one we generate

Most of these validations are just verifying that the user did not modify
what we generated or what they passed in initially before uploading the file.

The presigned url we generate is in our file scan bucket under `/unscanned/{pending_file_id}/{file_name}`.

> We create a record in the `pending_file` table about the record, and connect it to only the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We create a record in the `pending_file` table about the file, and connect it only to the user.
```

A file is not connected to any entity like an opportunity or application until the very end.

We also create a record in the DynamoDB table and set the status to `pending`.

In our response we return two key values:
* The URL that they need to upload to which will look like `https://s3.amazonaws.com/{the bucket name}`

> * The body of the request to call the presigned URL endpoint with which includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The request body to send to the presigned URL endpoint, which includes:
```

## Status Streaming
We have a `GET /v1/files/{pending_file_id}/results` endpoint that streams results
back to the user with the current status of the file. This endpoint checks DynamoDB
for the status, which gets updated by the virus scanning lambda and periodically returns
a chunk of results, stopping when the file's status is `complete`/`infected` OR it reaches
the maximum configured time.

When the status is `complete`, we'll grab some metadata about the file to return to the user
as a convenience including the file size, file name, and a download path, although it's assumed
that the next step will be to update the pending file and change it to a specific type of file.

This endpoint will return its results as `\n` separated chunks like so:
```
{"data": {"status": "pending", "file_metadata": null}}\n
{"data": {"status": "in_progress", "file_metadata": null}}\n
{"data": {"status": "complete", "file_metadata": {"file_size_bytes": 15, "file_name": "example.txt", "download_path": "https://s3.amazonaws.com/..."}}}
```

## Scan Callback
We have a `POST /v1/files/{pending_file_id}` endpoint which the file scanning

> lambda calls to update the files status in our pending_file table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lambda calls to update the file's status in our pending_file table.
```

## How do I test with an infected file?

> [!CAUTION]
> Although this file is not actually infected, it will trigger
> all virus scanners. It is probable that you can trigger virus scanners
> on your own machine, or that are administered by your IT department.

Our virus scanner will trigger for [EICAR](https://www.eicar.org/download-anti-malware-testfile/) files
which are standard files that will trip the virus scanner.

> [!CAUTION]
> Reiterating the warning above, you will probably trigger any virus scanners that your IT department has setup.
> Speaking from experience, it might be a good idea to give them a heads up to avoid any concerned emails.

# Example Script

This is an example python script that can go through the following steps:
* Get a presigned URL from our API
* Upload a file to that presigned URL
* Stream the results back from the results endpoint until completed

It does not handle any errors, and does not handle making the file into
the corresponding kind of file.

Pre-requisites
* Python 3 (tested with 3.14, but anything fairly recent should work)
* The requests library installed (`pip install requests`)

> * Whichever environment/API you are running this against, you first need an API key which you can get by logging in and going to the correspond [developers](https://simpler.grants.gov/developers) page (adjust the URL accordingly for the environment).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Whichever environment/API you are running this against, you first need an API key which you can get by logging in and going to the corresponding [developers](https://simpler.grants.gov/developers) page (adjust the URL accordingly for the environment).
```
